# 1 Samuel 29: David sent back from battle

== 29:1
T: The Philistines gathered to Aphek
R: 'Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.' Notice now the Philistines gathered together. Preparing. Notice all their armies to Aphek. A massing point. Notice and the Israelites pitched by a fountain. Israel's camp. Notice which is in Jezreel. A valley. Notice that the great battle was approaching. Notice that David was in the Philistine ranks. Notice the danger of his position. Notice that Aphek was where the ark had once been lost. Notice that history seemed to repeat. Notice that David faced fighting his own people. Notice that he had no way out by himself. Notice that God was about to intervene. Psalm 25 says, 'mine eyes are ever toward the LORD; for he shall pluck my feet out of the net.' Notice God's power to rescue from traps. Today, when you are caught in a net of your own making, look to the LORD. He can pluck your feet out.
S: The Philistines gathered all their forces at Aphek while Israel camped by the spring in Jezreel. David was trapped in the Philistine ranks, facing battle against his own people with no way out by himself. When you are caught in a net of your own making, look to the LORD, for He shall pluck your feet out of the net.
P: Caught in a net. 1 Samuel 29:1: 'the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek.' David trapped. He shall pluck my feet out of the net.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel291 #Rescue #Trap #Trust #BibleVerse

== 29:2
T: In the rereward with Achish
R: 'And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.' Notice and the lords of the Philistines passed on. Marching. Notice by hundreds, and by thousands. Organised. Notice but David and his men passed on in the rereward. At the rear. Notice with Achish. As his bodyguard. Notice that David marched with Israel's enemies. Notice the uncomfortable picture. Notice that God's anointed walked in the wrong army. Notice that compromise had led him here. Notice that he marched toward an impossible situation. Notice that he could not fight Israel without betraying God. Notice that he could not refuse without exposing his deception. Notice that God would provide the way out. First Corinthians 10 says God 'will with the temptation also make a way to escape.' Notice God's faithfulness. Today, if you find yourself marching in the wrong army, cry to God. He makes a way to escape.
S: The Philistine lords marched by hundreds and thousands, with David and his men at the rear with Achish. God's anointed was marching with Israel's enemies, trapped between betraying God and exposing his deception. If you find yourself in the wrong place, cry to God, for He will with every temptation also make a way to escape.
P: The wrong army. 1 Samuel 29:2: 'David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.' Compromise led here. God makes a way to escape.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel292 #Compromise #Escape #Faithfulness #BibleVerse

== 29:3
T: What do these Hebrews here
R: 'Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews here? And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me unto this day?' Notice then said the princes of the Philistines. Objecting. Notice what do these Hebrews here? Suspicious. Notice and Achish said. Defending David. Notice is not this David, the servant of Saul? Identifying him. Notice which hath been with me these days, or these years. Long service. Notice and I have found no fault in him. Trusting. Notice that the Philistine commanders were suspicious. Notice that Achish vouched for David. Notice that God was about to free David. Proverbs 21 says, 'The king's heart is in the hand of the LORD.' Notice God's control of rulers. Today, trust that God can use even others' suspicions to rescue you.
S: The Philistine commanders asked what these Hebrews were doing there, and Achish defended David as Saul's former servant in whom he had found no fault. God used the commanders' suspicion where David's deception had fooled Achish. Trust that God can use even others' suspicions to rescue you, for the king's heart is in the hand of the LORD.
P: Suspicion. 1 Samuel 29:3: 'What do these Hebrews here?' God used the commanders' doubts. The king's heart is in the hand of the LORD.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel293 #Providence #Rescue #Sovereignty #BibleVerse

== 29:4
T: Make this fellow return
R: 'And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him, Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us.' Notice and the princes of the Philistines were wroth. Angry. Notice make this fellow return. Send him back. Notice that he may go again to his place. To Ziklag. Notice and let him not go down with us to battle. Excluded. Notice lest in the battle he be an adversary to us. Distrust. Notice that the commanders feared David would turn on them. Notice that being rejected can be God's deliverance. Notice that God protected David from his own folly. Psalm 37 says, 'The steps of a good man are ordered by the LORD.' Notice God's ordering. Today, see God's hand when doors close. Rejection may be His protection.
S: The Philistine commanders angrily told Achish to send David back to his town and not let him go into battle, lest he turn against them. Their distrust became God's rescue, protecting David from a battle he should never have joined. See God's hand when doors close, for the steps of a good man are ordered by the LORD.
P: Sent back. 1 Samuel 29:4: 'Make this fellow return… and let him not go down with us to battle.' Rejection was rescue. The steps of a good man are ordered.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel294 #Protection #Rejection #Providence #BibleVerse

== 29:5
T: Saul slew his thousands
R: 'Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?' Notice is not this David? Recognising him. Notice of whom they sang one to another in dances. His fame. Notice saying, Saul slew his thousands. The song. Notice and David his ten thousands. Their defeat. Notice that the old song followed David again. Notice that the song that brought trouble now brought rescue. Notice that his past victories against the Philistines spoke for him. Notice that his reputation protected him from fighting Israel. Notice that God used the past to rescue the present. Notice that the same words had different effects at different times. Notice that God weaves all things together. Notice that David's true identity could not be hidden. Genesis 50 says, 'ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good.' Notice God's purposes. Today, trust God to use your past in His plan. Nothing is wasted in His hands.
S: The commanders asked whether this was not the David of whom they sang, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands. The song that once stirred trouble now brought rescue, as David's true identity and past victories spoke for him. Trust God to use your past in His plan, for what others meant for evil God meant for good.
P: The song again. 1 Samuel 29:5: 'Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands.' His past rescued him. Nothing is wasted in God's hands.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel295 #Providence #Identity #Past #BibleVerse

== 29:6
T: Thou hast been upright
R: 'Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely, as the LORD liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheless the lords favour thee not.' Notice then Achish called David. Explaining. Notice surely, as the LORD liveth. Using Israel's God's name. Notice thou hast been upright. Praise. Notice and thy going out and thy coming in… is good in my sight. Approval. Notice for I have not found evil in thee. Trusting. Notice nevertheless the lords favour thee not. The decision. Notice that Achish swore by the LORD. Notice the irony that David had deceived him. Notice that Achish was kind but powerless. Psalm 33 says, 'The LORD bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought.' Notice God's overruling. Today, recognise that God can overrule decisions you cannot control.
S: Achish called David and swore by the LORD that David had been upright and that he had found no fault in him, but the other lords did not approve of him. The irony is that David had deceived Achish, yet God overruled through the other commanders. Recognise that God can overrule decisions you cannot control, for the LORD brings the counsel of the heathen to nought.
P: Overruled. 1 Samuel 29:6: 'thou hast been upright… nevertheless the lords favour thee not.' God overruled through others. The LORD bringeth counsel to nought.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel296 #Sovereignty #Providence #Irony #BibleVerse

== 29:7
T: Return, and go in peace
R: 'Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the Philistines.' Notice wherefore now return. Go back. Notice and go in peace. Released. Notice that thou displease not the lords. Avoiding conflict. Notice of the Philistines. The commanders. Notice that David was released peacefully. Notice that he did not have to fight Israel. Notice that he did not have to expose his deception. Notice that God provided a peaceful exit. Notice that go in peace was God's mercy through a pagan king. Notice that David was spared an impossible choice. Notice that grace rescued him from his own entanglement. Notice that God was kinder than David deserved. Psalm 103 says, 'He hath not dealt with us after our sins.' Notice God's undeserved mercy. Today, thank God for rescues you did not deserve. His grace frees us from our own entanglements.
S: Achish told David to go back in peace so as not to displease the Philistine lords. God provided a peaceful exit from an impossible choice, kinder than David deserved. Thank God for rescues you did not deserve, for He has not dealt with us after our sins.
P: Go in peace. 1 Samuel 29:7: 'Wherefore now return, and go in peace.' An undeserved rescue. He hath not dealt with us after our sins.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel297 #Grace #Mercy #Rescue #BibleVerse

== 29:8
T: But what have I done
R: 'And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?' Notice but what have I done? Protesting. Notice and what hast thou found in thy servant? Asking. Notice so long as I have been with thee. Service. Notice that I may not go fight. Wanting to go. Notice against the enemies of my lord the king? Ambiguous. Notice that David kept up the pretence. Notice that he protested being sent away. Notice the ambiguity of my lord the king. Notice that our instincts can resist God's mercy. Notice that the words echo his earlier innocent question to Jonathan. Proverbs 16 says, 'Commit thy works unto the LORD, and thy thoughts shall be established.' Notice the need for honest commitment. Today, do not resist God's rescue to keep up appearances. Accept His way out.
S: David protested to Achish, asking what he had done that he could not fight against the enemies of my lord the king. He kept up the pretence with ambiguous words, protesting the very rescue God provided. Do not resist God's rescue to keep up appearances, but commit your works to the LORD.
P: Keeping up appearances. 1 Samuel 29:8: 'But what have I done?' Protesting God's rescue. Commit thy works unto the LORD. Accept His way out.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel298 #Honesty #Rescue #Pretence #BibleVerse

== 29:9
T: As an angel of God
R: 'And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.' Notice and Achish answered. Kindly. Notice I know that thou art good in my sight. Affirming. Notice as an angel of God. High praise. Notice notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said. The verdict. Notice he shall not go up with us to the battle. Final. Notice that Achish held David in high esteem. Notice that his praise was undeserved given David's deception. Notice that God gave David favour even with enemies. Notice that God's protection worked through human decisions. Notice that David's reputation remained intact. Notice that grace covered David. Proverbs 16 says, 'When a man's ways please the LORD, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.' Notice God's favour. Today, remember that God's favour is grace, not merit. Walk worthy of it.
S: Achish told David he was as good in his sight as an angel of God, but the Philistine commanders had said he must not go into battle. God gave David undeserved favour even with an enemy, while the commanders' firm decision protected him. Remember that God's favour is grace, not merit, and walk worthy of it.
P: An angel of God. 1 Samuel 29:9: 'thou art good in my sight, as an angel of God.' Undeserved favour. God's favour is grace, not merit.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel299 #Grace #Favour #Humility #BibleVerse

== 29:10
T: Rise up early in the morning
R: 'Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy… servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart.' Achish told David to rise early with his master's servants who had come with him and leave as soon as there was light. Notice wherefore now rise up early. Prompt departure. Notice in the morning. A new day. Notice with thy master's servants. Saul's former men. Notice that are come with thee. David's band. Notice and as soon as ye be up early. Quickly. Notice and have light, depart. Leave at dawn. Notice that Achish called them thy master's servants. Notice that he still saw them as Saul's men. Notice that light marked the way home. Notice that dawn often marks new beginnings. Notice that David's swift return would matter at Ziklag. Psalm 30 says, 'joy cometh in the morning.' Notice morning's promise. Today, rise early to follow God's way out. Morning light brings new direction.
S: Achish told David to rise early with his master's servants who had come with him and leave as soon as there was light. Dawn brought release at God's timing, and David's swift return would matter greatly at Ziklag. Rise early to follow God's way out, for joy comes in the morning.
P: Leave at first light. 1 Samuel 29:10: 'rise up early in the morning… and have light, depart.' God timed the release. Joy cometh in the morning.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel2910 #Morning #Timing #Release #BibleVerse

== 29:11
T: David and his men rose up early
R: 'So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.' Notice so David and his men rose up early. Obeying. Notice to depart in the morning. Leaving. Notice to return into the land of the Philistines. To Ziklag. Notice and the Philistines went up to Jezreel. To battle. Notice that David's path and the battle separated. Notice that God removed David from Saul's final battle. Notice that David would have no part in Saul's death. Notice that his hands remained clean. Notice that the two paths would lead to very different ends. Notice that a crisis awaited David at home. Notice that God's timing brought him back just when needed. Isaiah 30 says, 'This is the way, walk ye in it.' Notice God's guiding of paths. Today, trust God to lead you away from battles that are not yours. His paths protect your future.
S: David and his men rose early to return to Philistine territory, while the Philistines went up to Jezreel. God removed David from Saul's final battle, keeping his hands clean and bringing him home just when he was needed. Trust God to lead you away from battles that are not yours, for He says, This is the way, walk ye in it.
P: Separate paths. 1 Samuel 29:11: 'David and his men rose up early to depart… And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.' His hands kept clean. This is the way, walk ye in it.
H: #DailyGrace #1Samuel2911 #Guidance #Protection #Providence #BibleVerse
